Pr 2 of 2: Add Microarray Pathway Analysis - GSVA example (#362)
AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples: 02-microarray/pathway-analysis_microarray_03_gsva.Rmd

max_dup_df
```

We can see `GSM917111` now has the `0.2294387` value for Entrez ID `6013` like expected. 
Looks like we were able to successfully get rid of the duplicate Entrez gene identifiers!

Now let's combine our de-duplicated data with the rest of the mapped data!

```{r}
filtered_mapped_df <- mapped_df %>%
  # We won't be using Ensembl IDs moving forward, so we will drop this column

>   dplyr::select(-Ensembl) %>%

Reviewer: You will see, I brought this back. Because we show this in a preview I don't want users think that this whichever Ensembl ID actually makes it into the data frame has anything to do with anything. 

I realize this means we drop it twice, but I think it makes the data frame less confusing for the preview.

The idea here is that we will get pathway-level scores for each sample that indicate if genes in a pathway vary concordantly in one direction (over-expressed or under-expressed relative to the overall population) [@Hanzelmann2013].

The output is a gene set by sample matrix of GSVA scores.

### Perform GSVA

Let's perform GSVA using the `gsva()` function.
See `?gsva` for more options.

```{r}
gsva_results <- gsva(
  filtered_mapped_matrix,
  hallmarks_list,
  method = "gsva",
  # Appropriate for our log2-transformed microarray data
  kcdf = "Gaussian",
  # Minimum gene set size
  min.sz = 15,
  # Maximum gene set size
  max.sz = 500,
  # Compute Gaussian-distributed scores
  mx.diff = TRUE,
  # Don't print out the progress bar
  verbose = FALSE
)
```

Let's explore what the output of gsva() looks like.

```{r}
head(gsva_results[, 1:10])
```

## Find differentially expressed pathways

If we want to identify most differentially expressed pathways across subgroups, we can use functionality in the `limma` package to test the GSVA scores.

> Keep in mind that the `mx.diff = TRUE` argument that we supplied to the `gsva()` function in the previous section means the GSVA output scores should be normally distributed, which will be evident in our downstream analyses.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is one approach for working with GSVA scores.
The `mx.diff = TRUE` argument that we supplied to the `gsva()` function in the previous section means the GSVA output scores should be normally distributed, which allows downstream analyses that make this assumption about the distribution.
```
And I would cite the package _vignette_ here which comes out and says this nicely IMO!

Now let's create the results table based on the contrasts fitted model.

This step will provide the Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction.
The `topTable()` function default is to use Benjamini-Hochberg but this can be changed to a different method using the `adjust.method` argument (see the `?topTable` help page for more about the options).

```{r}
# Apply multiple testing correction and obtain stats
stats_df <- topTable(contrasts_fit, number = nrow(expression_df)) %>%
  tibble::rownames_to_column("Gene")
```

Let's take a peek at our results table.

```{r}
head(stats_df)
```

For each gene, each group's fold change in expression, compared to the average of the other groups is reported.

By default, results are ordered from largest `F` value to the smallest, which means your most differentially expressed genes across all groups should be toward the top.

This means `HALLMARK_UNFOLDED_PROTEIN_RESPONSE` appears to be the pathway that contains the most significant distribution of scores across subgroups. 

## Visualizing Results

Let's make a plot for our most significant pathway, `HALLMARK_UNFOLDED_PROTEIN_RESPONSE`.

### Sina plot

> First we need to get our GSVA scores for this pathway in an appropriate format for `ggplot2`.

Reviewer 2: Can we "remind" folks what `gsva_results` looks like here by repeating what we have at line 451:

```r
head(gsva_results[, 1:10])
```

Reviewer 2: I would also maybe make a note about what you mean by "an appropriate format."

## GSVA - Microarray

Rather than ranking genes based on some gene-level statistic selected by the user, GSVA fits a model and ranks genes based on their expression level relative to the sample distribution.
The pathway-level score calculated is a way of asking how genes _within_ a gene set vary as compared to genes that are _outside_ of that gene set [@Malhotra2018].

The idea here is that we will get pathway-level scores for each sample that indicate if genes in a pathway vary concordantly in one direction (over-expressed or under-expressed relative to the overall population) [@Hanzelmann2013].

The output is a gene set by sample matrix of GSVA scores.

### Perform GSVA

Let's perform GSVA using the `gsva()` function.

```{r}
gsva_results <- gsva(
  filtered_mapped_matrix,
  hallmarks_list,
  method = "gsva",
  # Appropriate for our log2-transformed microarray data
  kcdf = "Gaussian",
  # Minimum gene set size
  min.sz = 15,
  # Maximum gene set size
  max.sz = 500,
  # Compute Gaussian-distributed scores
  mx.diff = TRUE,
  # Don't print out the progress bar
  verbose = FALSE
)
```

> Note that the `gsva()` function documentation says we can use `kcdf = "Gaussian"` if we have expression values that are continuous such as log-CPMs, log-RPKMs or log-TPMs, but we would use `kcdf = "Poisson"` on integer counts.

Author: Gotcha, took it out of this example 👍.

See `?gsva` for more options.

```{r}
# Let's explore what the output of gsva() looks like
head(gsva_results[, 1:10])
```

## Find the pathway with the most significant differences across treatment groups

> If we want to know which pathway is most differentially expressed across subgroups, we can pretty easily use GSVA scores with differential expression steps using the limma package. 

Author: I added a general statement after this one re `mx.diff = TRUE` and what it means for the GSVA output in latest set of changes. Let me know what you think. Should it be more detailed?

> ### Create the design matrix

Reviewer: For reviewing purposes, I'll note that most of this is a fairly direct grab from https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/02-microarray/differential-expression_microarray_02_several-groups.html#44_Create_the_design_matrix and has been reviewed before. 

Only difference is the subgroups are slightly different.

contrasts_fit <- contrasts.fit(fit, contrast_matrix)

# Re-smooth the Bayes
contrasts_fit <- eBayes(contrasts_fit)
```

Here's a [nifty article and example](http://varianceexplained.org/r/empirical_bayes_baseball/) about what the empirical Bayes smoothing is for [@bayes-estimates].

Now let's create the results table based on the contrasts fitted model.

This step will provide the Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction.
The `topTable()` function default is to use Benjamini-Hochberg but this can be changed to a different method using the `adjust.method` argument (see the `?topTable` help page for more about the options).

```{r}
# Apply multiple testing correction and obtain stats
stats_df <- topTable(contrasts_fit, number = nrow(expression_df)) %>%
  tibble::rownames_to_column("Gene")
```

Let's take a peek at our results table.

```{r}
head(stats_df)
```

For each gene, each group's fold change in expression, compared to the average of the other groups is reported.

By default, results are ordered from largest `F` value to the smallest, which means your most differentially expressed genes across all groups should be toward the top.

> This means `HALLMARK_UNFOLDED_PROTEIN_RESPONSE` appears to be the pathway that contains the most significant distribution of scores across subgroups. 

Reviewer 2: Just wanted to note that I did not review this section in detail because there were two reviewers for #225.

## Visualizing Results

Let's make a plot for our most significant pathway, `HALLMARK_UNFOLDED_PROTEIN_RESPONSE`.

### Sina plot

First we need to get our GSVA scores for this pathway in an appropriate format for `ggplot2`.

```{r}
annotated_results_df <-
  # Pull out only the results for this pathway

>   gsva_results["HALLMARK_UNFOLDED_PROTEIN_RESPONSE", ] %>%

Reviewer 2: I think a _more general_ approach where we are getting the `gsva_results` matrix (an assumption, could be a wide data frame) into a long format could be welcome here. I suspect we don't do a lot of wide -> long in these examples and it is something that comes up pretty often when you go to plot these types of data. This has come up before on the draft PR https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/pull/352#discussion_r524295683. (To be fair, I'm the one that brought it up each time.)

I anticipate that we'd want to break this up into two or three steps instead of doing it "all at once":

- Make long format
- Maybe filter to relevant pathway 
- Join metadata

(Filter before join makes sense to me generally but depends on how we're going to write about it and what we want to show!)

sina_plot <-
  ggplot(
    annotated_results_df, # Supply our annotated data frame
    aes(
      x = subgroup, # Replace with a grouping variable relevant to your data
      y = HALLMARK_UNFOLDED_PROTEIN_RESPONSE, # Our pathway of interest
      color = subgroup # Let's make the groups different colors too
    )
  ) +
  # Add a boxplot that will have summary stats
  geom_boxplot(outlier.shape = NA) +
  # Make a sina plot that shows individual values
  ggforce::geom_sina() +
  # Adjust the plot background for better visualization
  theme_bw()

# Display plot
sina_plot
```

Looks like the `Group 4` samples have lower GSVA scores for `HALLMARK_UNFOLDED_PROTEIN_RESPONSE` as compared to the `SHH` and `Group 3` scores.

Let's save this plot to PNG.

```{r}
ggsave(file.path(plots_dir, "GSE37382_gsva_HALLMARK_UNFOLDED_PROTEIN_RESPONSE_sina_plot.png"),
  plot = sina_plot
)
```

## Write results to file

Now let's write our all of our GSVA results to file.

```{r}
gsva_results %>%
  as.data.frame() %>%
  tibble::rownames_to_column("pathway") %>%
  readr::write_tsv(file.path(
    results_dir,
    "GSE37382_gsva_results.tsv"
  ))

> ```

Reviewer 2: Wondering if we want to save the `topTable()` output as well? I don't have strong feelings about that. Or maybe I don't like that idea at all 🤔

Author: My thoughts on this were we probably want to stick to as close to GSVA as possible in this example, seeing as we have an existing differential expression example where the `topTable()` output is saved. Users in this particular situation will likely be more interested in the GSVA results, however, I can be convinced otherwise. 

I did not save the `topTable()` output in the last set of commits based on my thoughts above, but feel free to let me know if you feel more strongly about saving the output now.
